---
  title: How to setup a fcstd base
  audience: contributors
---

You need to have FreeCAD and [FreeCAD for BOLTS installed]({{ doc(freecad,installation) }}).

This assumes, that the blt file for this part is already created, and you have
a fcstd file with the part that you want to add to BOLTS.

We do this at the example of a aluminum T slot extrusion.

### Check the fcstd file in FreeCAD

Load the part in FreeCAD and check that it looks visually ok.

If the part is supposed to be parametric, then try to change the parameters
that BOLTS should be able to set. For the aluminum extrusion this is only the
length, which corresponds to the height of the box in the file. So we select
the box in the combo view, select the data tab and change the value for the
height. The part should now change its length, but still look like expected. Do
this for all parameters, also check combinations.

[<img alt="Visually checking the part" src="{{ static(fcstd-base1.png) }}" />]({{ static(fcstd-base1.png) }})

### Find out feature and property names

Usually, a part consists of several features. We need a way to tell BOLTS which
feature is the one that it should use. If the part is parametric, we also need
to tell it, how the properties of the features map to the parameters.

Features in FreeCAD have a unique name in a document, but this name is not
always identical to the label that is displayed in the combo view, so be
careful. BOLTS offers a convenient way to find out the names of all features in
the document. Enter the following lines into the python console of FreeCAD:

    import BOLTS
    BOLTS.list_names(FreeCAD.ActiveDocument)

The first line imports and starts BOLTS, the second line calls a function from
BOLTS that gives out a list of all features with their label and the
corresponding object names.

[<img alt="Finding feature names" src="{{ static(fcstd-base2.png) }}" />]({{ static(fcstd-base2.png) }})

We need to remember the name of the root feature, that BOLTS is supposed to
insert, and the names of all features that provide parametric behaviour and the
corresponding names of the properties.

For the T slot extrusion, the root feature has the label `Fillet`, and the name
`Fillet`, the length of the extrusion can be changed with the `Height` property
of the `Box` (both name and label).

### Copy the fcstd file to the correct directory

The fcstd file goes to the subdirectory of the collection in the freecad
directory of the repository.

### Write the base file

The base file provides BOLTS with all the information it needs to know about
the files in a collection directory.

For the aluminum extrusion it looks like this:

    ---
    - filename: tslot-20x20-2S.fcstd
      author: Johannes Reinhardt <jreinhardt@ist-dein-freund.de>
      license: CC0 <http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/>
      type: fcstd
      objects:
       - objectname: Fillet
         classids: [tslot20x20-2s]
         proptoparam:
           Fillet : {Label : name}
           Box: {Height : l}
      source: created from scratch, dimensions from http://www13.boschrexroth-us.com/partstream/Load_Category.aspx?Category=20mm%20Series&menu=1,1,1
    ...

The hyphens and dots on the first and the last line indicate the begin and end
of the metadata (a base file is a [YAML file](http://yaml.org/). Between those
two markers follows a list of base file elements, one for each file. The begin
of a new element is indicated by a hyphen. If there are more than one file in
the collection directory, there would be more elements, but here it is only
one.

Each element contains various fields with information about the file, e.g. the
filename or name and email address of the author, here in lines 2 and 3.

Because the part will form a combined work with the rest of the design, and we
do not want to force the users of BOLTS to put their work under a certain
license, BOLTS requires that the author waives all rights for this part, by
releasing it in the Public Domain, preferably by the use of the [CC0
License](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).  This is done in
the fourth line.

In the fifth line the type of file is indicated, in this case it is a fcstd
file. Then follows a list of objects. It is in principle possible, to have
several different parts in one fcstd file. Each element describes one object.

The objectname field gives the name of the root feature for this object. We
learned this name in the second step of this tutorial. For the extrusion this
is `Fillet`.

The classids field gives a list of classids (as given in the blt file of this
collection), for which this object is used. In our example it is only a single
classid.

The proptoparam field gives the mapping between the parameters as specified in
the blt file of the collection, and the feature names and properties that we
found out in the second step of this tutorial. The `Label` property of the
feature with name `Fillet` (the root feature) should be set to the name of the
part and the `Height` property of the feature `Box` should be set to the length
`l`.

A parameter might appear more than once if more than one feature needs to be
adjusted.

The optional source field allows to give information about the origin of the
file. So if there is a URL from which this file was downloaded, this can be
included here.

When working on base files, pay attention to whitespace and indentation and do
not use tabs.

### Test it

You should now test the newly added part. This is most easily done on the
command line by typing

    ./bolts.py export freecad
    ./bolts.py test freecad

in the repo directory. This will fire up a FreeCAD instance with the module
search path set appropriately, so that typing

    import BOLTS

on the FreeCAD python console should do the trick.

If BOLTS is started successfully, try adding the newly added part to the
current document with different combinations of parameters.

[<img alt="Testing the result" src="{{ static(fcstd-base3.png) }}" />]({{ static(fcstd-base3.png) }})

### Next steps

You might want to [contribute]({{ doc(general,development) }}) this part to
BOLTS, so that every user can profit from your efforts.
