---
  title: Writing Documentation
  author: Johannes <jreinhardt@ist-dein-freund.de>
---

I consider most of BOLTS technical problems to be solved sufficiently well for
now. The only thing that remains to be done until I can release a first beta
version is to write documentation. Which proves to be more difficult than
expected.

<!-- more -->

Together with this blog post I will push a polished version of the web page. It
is pretty close to what I want, with the exception of the documentation
section, which will be in flow for a bit.

I want the documentation for BOLTS to serve one single purpose: To provide
people willing to use and contribute to BOLTS with everything they need to do
just that. But I struggle with that on several levels.

When I write something (you can check out a few bits and pieces of what I have
right now in the [documentation hub]({{ url(docs.index) }})), I become aware of
so many little things, that are self-evident for me, but probably are not for
people that have a different background, a different way of working or a
different way of thinking. Incorporating and explaining all these things leads
to long and complicated texts, which is not what I want.

The second problem is organisation. I roughly know, which topics I want to
cover, and I have decided to do that in a tutorial style. But then I feel that
some aspects do not fit in this format. It took me a while to figure out, that
it feels right to divide everything in documentation for users and
documentation for contributors.

Related, but on a different level is that many of the task I want to describe
share some of the steps (you should create a git topic branch both when adding
a new collection and when creating a drawing), but on the other hand, these
steps differ depending on other circumstances. I do not see clearly yet how to
organize this complexity.

I will work on this in the next days and hope to make some progress.

To end on a positive note: I had the idea of using the [comment system of the
blog]({{ blog(2013/09/24/Comments) }}) to add a comment section to
each page of documentation. I hope this encourages people to ask questions,
propose additions and to generally give feedback to enhance the documentation.

