---
  title: Beaming happily
  date: 2014-04-23 17:25:00
  author: Johannes <jreinhardt@ist-dein-freund.de>
---

It has been very quiet on this blog in the last weeks, but BOLTS is not dead
and should see more activity again. There is a stable release coming up very
soon, but more about that in another post. This post is about the amazing work
of Bernd from the [FreeCAD Forum](http://forum.freecadweb.org/index.php), who
added a huge number of steel beam profiles to BOLTS.

<!-- more -->

FreeCAD has had a Architecture workbench for quite some time, and has actually
a pretty active group of architects that constantly improve its already
impressive [architectural
capabilities](http://forum.freecadweb.org/viewtopic.php?f=23&t=5526).

The Arch workbench has a [part type specifically for structural
elements](http://www.freecadweb.org/wiki/index.php?title=Arch%20Structure) like
beams, and also provides a few common profiles. The approach BOLTS takes for
managing parts is also very well suited for the different kinds of profiles, so
Bernd started to add a ton of them to BOLTS. And there are really a lot of
different profiles. Most of them can be added both as a Arch structure or as a
ordinary part.

[<img alt="Some of the steel profiles" src="{{ static(profiles.png) }}" />]({{ static(profiles.png) }})

During this effort we uncovered a fair amount of problems with BOLTS, like
issues with names and standards and the BOLTS GUI in FreeCAD, that will have to
be addressed. But that was somehow expected at this still quite early stage of
development.

If you want to testdrive this, you can grab the latest development snapshot
from the [webpage](http://jreinhardt.github.io/BOLTS/index.html). This will
turn into a stable release unless problems are uncovered, so every bit of
testing is appreciated.

